======================================================================
Exam: IBPS PO
Phase: Mains
Year: 2020
Shift: 1
Subject: Reasoning
Source: https://www.bankersadda.com/wp-content/uploads/multisite/2021/12/29144902/IBPS-PO-Mains-Previous-Year-Paper-2020-.pdf
======================================================================

REASONING ABILITY 
 
2 

 
 
8. What is the position of ‘beoopv’ from left end in Step 
IV? 
 
(a) Second 
(b) Third 
(c) Fourth 
 
(d) Fifth 
(e) None of these 
 
9. What will be the last step of the given input? 
(a) bdfgjmquv befhsva beoopv bffhopsuv bfostv 
gjsuvww 
(b) befgjmquv befhsva beoopv bffhopsuv efostv 
gjsuvww 
(c) cdfgjmquv befhsva beoopv bffhopsuv efostv 
gjsuvww 
(d) bdfgjmquv beoopv bffhopsuv bghjmosv efostv 
gjsuvww 
 
(e) None of these 
 
10. Which words are immediate left and immediate right 
of ‘nurdes’ in Step II respectively? 
(a) uragedz turvivf 
 
(b) eangerout dannou 
 
(c) euplicatf eangerout 
(d) turvivf , euplicatf  
(e) None of these 
 
Directions (11-13): Read the following information 
carefully and answer the following questions. 
 
Eight persons P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, and W lives in a building of 
eight floors such that the topmost floor is numbered as 8 
and the lowermost floor is numbered as 1 but not 
necessarily in the same order. They shops on eight 
different e-commerce websites viz. Flipkart, Ajio, Myntra, 
Jabong, Amazon, Shopclues, Jiomart, and Tata Cliq but not 
necessarily in the same order. 
 
The one who shops on Flipkart lives immediately above the 
one who shops on Shopclues. Neither V nor P shops on 
Flipkart, Tata Cliq and Myntra. Three persons live between 
V and S, who lives below V and also does not shops on 
Jabong. Only three persons live between W and R, who 
shops on Amazon. R lives on one of the even numbered 
floor above W and Q, who does not shops on Flipkart and 
Myntra and also does not live on the second floor. Two 
persons live between Q and the one who shops on Jabong. 
Three persons live between the one who shops on Jabong 
and the one who shops on Ajio. The number of persons 
living between the one who shops on Jabong and R is same 
as the number of persons living between the one who 
shops on Ajio and P. T lives on one of the floors below U. 
Both W and Q live on the even numbered floor. 
 
11. Who among the following lives on the fourth floor? 
 
(a) S 
(b) Q 
 
 
(c) The one who shops on Shopclues 
 
(d) U 
(e) Both (b) and (c) 
 
12. Who among the following shops on JioMart? 
 
(a) V 
(b) R 
(c) S 
 
(d) T 
(e) None of these 
 
13. How many persons live between the one who shops on 
JioMart and the one who shops on Ajio? 
 
(a) One 
(b) Two 
(c) Three 
 
(d) None 
(e) Four 
 
Directions (14-17): Read the following information 
carefully and answer the following questions. 
 
Seven persons A, B, C, D, E, F, and G are born on seven 
different dates in a year but not necessarily in the same 
order and they like different fruits. There is a gap of three 
days between the birth dates of every person. Ex- If R was 
born on 12th May then the person born immediately after 
R and immediately before R should be born a gap of 3 days. 
F was born on 16th June. Only two persons were born 
before F. The number of persons born before D, who likes 
Apple is equal to the number of persons born after G, who 
likes Guava. Only one person was born between G and A, 
who likes Oranges. B does not like Kiwi was born one of the 
dates before E but after C. B was not born after A. E does 
not like Grapes, Peach, and Kiwi. F does not like Peach, 
Kiwi, and Pear. 
 
14. Who among the following was born on 28th June? 
 
(a) The one who likes Pear 
 
 
(b) B 
 
 
(c) The one who likes Peach 
 
(d) E 
 
 
(e) Both (a) and (d) 
 
15. Who among the following was born just after the one 
who likes Grapes? 
(a) A 
 
(b) The one who likes Peach 
 
(c) The one who likes Kiwi 
(d) Both (a) and (b)  
(e) None of these 
 
16. How many persons were born between the one who 
likes Guava and the one who likes Grapes? 
 
(a) One 
(b) Two 
(c) Three 
 
(d) Four 
(e) None of these 
 
17. Who among the following was born on 2nd July? 
 
(a) G 
(b) D 
(c) E 
 
(d) None of these (e) Either (a) or (b) 
 
Directions (18-20): Each of the questions below consists 
of a question and two statements numbered I, and II given 
below it. You have to decide whether the data provided in 
the statements are sufficient to answer the question. Read 
all the statements and answer the following questions. 
(a) If the data in statement I alone are sufficient 
(b) If the data in statement II alone are sufficient 
(c) If the data either in statement I alone or statement II 
alone are sufficient to answer 
 
3 

 
 
(d) If the data given in both I and II together are not 
sufficient 
 
(e) If the data in both the statements I and II together are 
necessary to answer 
 
18. Eight boxes P, Q, R, S, T, U, V and W are arranged one 
above the other but not necessarily in the same order. 
Which of the following box is placed just below the box 
U? 
 
Statements I:  
More than three boxes are placed 
between S and T, which is placed 
below the box S. Box Q and S are 
placed adjacent to each other. Two 
boxes are placed between U and Q. 
Only one box is placed between P and 
T. 
 
Statements II: One box is placed between Q and R. 
Two boxes are placed between P and 
Q. One box is placed between T and R. 
Box P does not adjacent to box T. Box 
U is placed exactly in between the 
boxes P and the box which is placed 
just above the box R. 
 
19. Eight members A, B, M, N, O, P, Q and R are living in the 
family. In which only two married couples. How is N 
related to P? 
 
Statements I:  
A is the sister-in-law of P, who is the 
mother-in-law Q. R is the parent of A, 
who is unmarried. B is the father of N. 
Q is not the wife of N. N, who is 
married is not sibling of A. 
 
Statements II:  A is married to B. N is the father of O. 
A is the father of M. M is the sibling of 
N. 
 
20. In a certain code language. How is “Utility” coded in the 
given code language? 
 
Statements I:  
“man power required” is coded as 
“N12 E23 G15” and “power sector 
source” is coded as “N12 D21 Q17” 
and “man utility source” is coded as 
“E23 L14 Q17” and “global sector 
required” is coded as “T34 D21 G15” 
 
Statements II:  “Indian capital income” is coded as 
“W21 B14 S31” and “source of 
capital” is coded as “Q17 M29 B14” 
and “income utility source” is coded 
as “S31 L14 Q17” and “capital income 
surplus” is coded as “B14 S31 F18” ` 
 
Directions (21-24): Read the following information 
carefully and answer the following questions. 
 
Seven persons A, B, C, D, P, R, and S are related to Q in some 
manner. They all are sitting around a circular table such 
that some of them are facing the inside and some of them 
are facing outside. They all have different profession viz. 
Banker, Writer, Singer, Doctor, Nurse, Dancer, Engineer, 
and Teacher but not necessarily in the same order. One 
person has only one profession. Not more than four 
persons face same direction. 
 
The singer sits second to the right of Q. Three persons sit 
between A, who doesn’t sit near to Banker and the one who 
is Nurse. D is an Engineer. P sits opposite to Q, who is a 
Banker. C is a female but she is not a dancer. The teacher 
and the writer face inside. The one who is Brother of Q sits 
second to the left of Banker. Two persons sit between S, 
who is a doctor and brother of Q. D is the mother of Q and 
she sits opposite to S. D’s Daughter sits third to the left of 
D. A is the father of Q, who is a female. Both C and R is 
children of P, who is married to Q. B and R are the male 
members. B who faces inside sits opposite to the Dancer. 
The Writer sits second to the right of the Dancer. The 
Singer is married to the Doctor. S is the sister-in-law of Q. 
R does not sit immediate left of S. 
 
21. How is the Singer related to the Nurse? 
 
(a) Aunt 
(b) Uncle 
(c) Father 
 
(d) Mother 
(e) None of these 
 
22. How is the Teacher related to the Engineer? 
 
(a) Wife 
(b) Husband 
(c) Nephew 
 
(d) Daughter 
(e) None of these 
 
23. How many persons sit between the Doctor and 
Engineer, when counted from the right of Engineer? 
 
(a) One 
(b) Two 
(c) Three 
 
(d) Four 
(e) None of these 
 
24. What is the profession of the person who sits second to 
the right of S? 
 
(a) Banker 
(b) Singer 
(c) Dancer 
 
(d) Nurse 
(e) Teacher 
 
25. Google is trying to turn its search engine into an 
employment engine. Job hunters will be able to go to 
Google and see help-wanted listings that its search 
engine collects across the internet. The results will aim 
to streamline such listings by eliminating duplicate 
jobs posted on different sites. Google will also show 
employer ratings from current and former workers, as 
well as typical commute times to job locations. 
 
4 

 
 
(I)  Now a days Google market is not good that’s why 
Google launched new service. 
(II) Google is no more interested in providing other 
services to its consumer, now Google is focused 
only on turning its search engine into an 
employment engine. 
(III) Google’s search engine results will aim to well-
organized employment listings by removing 
duplicate jobs. 
(IV) Google is not interested to show any kind of 
ratings in its new employment search engine. 
 
Which of the following can be deduced from the given 
passage? 
 
(a) Only II and IV  
 
(b) Only I and III 
 
(c) Only II and III 
 
(d) Only III 
 
 
(e) None of these 
 
Directions (26-29): Read the following information 
carefully and answer the following questions. 
 
Eleven Houses A, B, C, D, E, F, P, Q, R, S, and T are located in 
a straight row such that the opening gates of some of them 
opens in north direction and some of them opens in south 
direction but not necessarily in the same order. No two 
adjacent houses opening gates opens in the same direction. 
House B is not located near House A. House Q is located to 
the immediate left of House B. House P is located fourth to 
the right of House D, which is located to the immediate left 
of House R. Number of Houses located to the left of House 
P is one more than the number of Houses located between 
House R and House P. Only two houses are located to the 
left of House A. The number of houses located between 
House P and House A is one less than the number of Houses 
located between House T and House C. House T is located 
near House P. Only one house is located between House F 
and House Q and the Gates of both of the houses doesn’t 
open in south direction. Only one house is located between 
House E and House S, which is not located near House C. 
House D is 2nd from one of the ends. 
 
26. Which of the following pair of Houses represents the 
immediate neighbors of P’s House? 
 
(a) House D and House F 
 
 
(b) House T and House F 
 
 
(c) House S and House T 
 
(d) House D and House A 
 
 
(e) None of these 
 
27. How many houses are located to the right of House S? 
 
(a) One 
(b) Four 
(c) Five 
 
(d) Three 
(e) Two 
 
28. How many houses are located between House A and 
House B? 
 
(a) Five 
(b) Four 
(c) Three 
 
(d) Six 
(e) None of these 
 
29. What is the position of House E with respect to House 
P? 
 
(a) Fourth to the right 
 
 
(b) Immediate left 
 
(c) Immediate right 
 
(d) Fourth to the left  
 
(e) None of these 
 
Directions (30): Read the following information carefully 
and answer the following questions. 
If 
(i) A & B means A is 5m west of B. 
(ii) A % B means A is 4m South of B. 
(iii) A * B means A is 6m North of B. 
(iv) A @ B means A is 4m East of B. 
 
30. In expression F&G, B&A%C&D&E*F@H, the Point A is 
in which direction of Point G? 
 
(a) West 
(b) North-West (c) East 
 
(d) North-East 
(e) South 
 
Directions (31-32): Read the following information 
carefully and answer the following questions. 
If 
(i) P & Q means P is the brother Q. 
(ii) P % Q means P is the father of Q. 
(iii) P * Q means P is the sister of Q. 
(iv) P @ Q means P is the Son of Q. 
(v) P $ Q means P is the daughter Q. 
(vi) P ? Q means P is the mother of Q. 
 
31. In expression Q&G, G&A%C&D?E*F@H@R, then, how 
is F related to A? 
 
(a) Son 
 
 
(b) Grandson 
 
 
(c) Granddaughter 
 
(d) Either (b) or (c)  
 
(e) Either (a) or (b) 
 
32. In expression Q?P, P&A%W&D?E*F@H@R, then, how 
is Q related to the E’s mother? 
 
(a) Maternal Grandfather 
 
 
(b) Paternal Grandfather 
 
 
(c) Paternal Grandmother 
 
(d) Maternal Grandmother 
 
 
(e) Either (a) or (c) 
 
33. Statement-Highlighting his achievements in present in 
rooting out corruption, Prime Minister Narendra Modi 
said that there has been "not even one taint or blot" on 
his government in these past three years. 
 
Which of the following abrogates the above statement? 
(I) 
Technology has brought about transparency and 
is being used to achieve great heights across 
sectors in India in Modi governance. 
 
5 

 
 
(II) 
In several parameters, the country is moving at a 
rapid pace under PM Modi’s government. Noting 
that infrastructure is essential for sustainable 
development. The increase in aspiration of the 
common people is the greatest cause of this fast 
track development of the country. 
(III) The billion Indians in India are still below 
poverty line and they are also finding the way to 
get rid of biggest problem of India which is 
corruption. 
(IV) India is now receiving record number of foreign 
direct investment and all credit agencies and 
multilateral fora are giving a positive rating 
about India. 
 
(a) Only II 
(b) Only III and IV (c) 
Only III 
 
(d) Only IV 
(e) Only I and III 
 
34. Statement- “In a big relief to liquor companies which 
are holding their stocks worth more than Rs. 200 crore 
in Bihar, the Supreme Court on Monday granted them 
two months more time to transport liquor out of the 
state and directed them to dispose off their stocks by 
July 31.” 
I. 
Beverages Companies, contended that it was 
possible even to destroy the existing stocks by the 
end of this month. 
II.  The apex court had earlier fixed a deadline of May 
31 for the companies to dispose off their stocks. 
III.  Seeking more time for transporting the stocks out 
of state, the confederation said in its petition that 
delay in disposing off stocks was beyond its control 
as clearances were required from various 
agencies. 
 
Which of the following can be the Presupposition of the 
given statement? 
 
(a) Only I 
 
 
(b) Only II and III  
 
(c) Only I and III 
 
(d) All of the above 
 
 
(e) None of the above 
 
35. Statement-The government has made quoting of 
Aadhaar mandatory for opening of bank accounts as 
well as for any financial transaction of 50,000 and 
above. 
(I) 
The government in its Budget 2017 has already 
mandated seeding of Aadhaar number with 
Permanent Account Number (PAN) to avoid 
individuals using multiple PANs to evade taxes. 
(II) Aadhaar is more secure and reliable than PAN for 
bank account transactions. 
(III) Aadhaar number is issued by the Unique 
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI). 
 
Which of the following statement can be concluded 
from the given statement? 
 
(a) All except II (b) Both II and III (c) 
Only I 
 
(d) Only I and II (e) None of the above 
Direction (36-39): Study the following information 
carefully and answer the given questions. 
 
Eight persons i.e. A, B, C, D, P, Q, R and S are sitting around 
two inscribed square table in such a way that four persons 
are seating at four corners each inner square and outer 
square. Persons sitting at inner square and outer square 
are facing to each other. 
 
C faces the one who sits 2nd to the right of S. Q is neither an 
immediate neighbor of S nor C. D faces to R and is an 
immediate neighbor of Q. A sits immediate left of R. B faces 
to P. Both B and C are not an immediate neighbor.  Neither 
P nor A face outside. 
 
36. Who among the following sits 3rd to the left of the one 
who faces D? 
 
(a) C 
(b) B 
(c) A 
 
(d) P 
(e) None of these 
 
37. How many persons sit between S and D, when counted 
to the right of S? 
 
(a) None 
 
 
(b) Two 
 
 
(c) One 
 
(d) Either One or Two 
 
(e) Both sit on different table 
 
38. Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and 
so form a group. Find the one who does not belong to 
that group? 
 
(a) B 
(b) D 
(c) S 
 
(d) Q 
(e) C 
 
39. The number of persons sit between P and R, when 
counted to the left of R and is same as the number of 
persons sit between B and ___ when counted to the 
right of __? 
 
(a) S 
(b) Q 
(c) D 
 
(d) Either (a) or (c) (e) 
None of these 
 
Direction (40-43): Study the following information 
carefully and answer the given questions. 
 
Eight persons A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H are working in a 
company in three different departments – Production, 
Management and Finance on two posts – Manager and 
General Manager but not necessarily in the same order. All 
they have different ages in the whole number. 
 
E’s age is twice of C’s age. A is 53 years old and working in 
production. The persons whose total age is 100 years are 
working in Finance as General Manager. F is working in 
Production. B is working in management but not with D 
and posts of B and D are different. Both H and G are 
working at same post but not in production department. 
Both H and F are working at different post. Not more than 
two persons working on same post in same department. 
 
6 

 
 
Both E and A working in same department but at different 
post. Both A and D work in different post. Sum of the ages 
of C and G is 64 years. Both C and D are manager but in 
different departments but not in the production. E is 12 
years older to F and 12 years younger to H. Difference 
between the age of C and D is equal to H’s age. B is 30 years 
old and its age is half the H’s age. 
 
40. How many persons are working as manager? 
 
(a) Four 
(b) Five 
(c) Three 
 
(d) Two 
(e) One 
 
41. Who among the following is 40 years old? 
 
(a) C 
(b) G 
(c) H 
 
(d) F 
(e) None of these 
 
42. Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and 
so form a group. Find the one who does not belong to 
that group? 
 
(a) E-48 
(b) D-84 
(c) G-40 
 
(d) C-36 
(e) B-30 
 
43. Which of the following is the bpost and department of 
B respectively? 
 
(a) Manager – Finance 
 
 
(b) General Manager – Management 
 
(c) Manager- Management 
 
(d) Can’t be determined 
 
 
(e) None of these 
 
Directions (44-45): Travis Kalanick spent most of the past 
decade turning a taxi app (Uber) into the world's most 
valuable startup. Uber is ride-hailing service that he helped 
found in 2009 and built into a transportation colossus. 
 
Travis Kalanick stepped down Tuesday as chief executive 
of Uber, after a seemingly endless series of scandals raised 
doubts over his leadership. Kalanick’s resignation doesn’t 
come as a surprise -- after he was caught on video chewing 
out an Uber driver who questioned the company’s 
compensation 
policies 
in 
February. 
Meanwhile, 
Shareholders released a damning report on the firm's 
management culture. 
(I)  Uber is a riding service that Chief Executive of Uber 
helped built into transportation prodigious. 
(II) Shareholders ordered Travis Kalanick to relinquish 
position of chief executive of Uber. 
(III) Holder released a report against firm’s management 
culture that was condemnatory. 
 
44. Which of the following can be hypothesized from the 
above passage? 
 
(a) Only II 
 
 
 
 
(b) Only I and III  
 
 
 
(c) Only I and II 
 
(d) All of these 
 
 
 
 
(e) None of these 
 
45. Which of the followings is not in the line with the 
passage? 
(I)  Kalanick’s resignation came under the pressure of 
damning report which is released by the 
Shareholders on management’s culture, this one 
of the reason of resignation of Chief executive of 
Uber. 
(II)  Travis Kalanick stepped down as chief executive 
of Uber, because endless series of scandals raised 
doubts over his leadership as well as he was 
caught on video chewing out an Uber driver and 
shareholder’s report was not in a favour of 
management. 
(III)  Travis Kalanick spent most of the past decade 
turning a taxi app (Uber) into the world’s most 
valuable startup. 
 
(a) Only II 
(b) Only I and III 
 
 
 
 
(c) Only I and II (d) All of these (e) None of these 
 
 
 
Direction (46 – 48): Read the data given below carefully 
and answer the questions. 
 
A train running between four stations i.e. A, B, C & D on 
Monday and Tuesday. The average speed of train on 
Monday during whole journey is 50 kmph and average 
speed of train on Tuesday during whole journey is 62.5 
kmph. On Monday train takes one hour less to cover 
distance between A and B as compare to that of on 
Tuesday. Train takes equal time to cover distance between 
B to C on both the given days, while train takes three hours 
more to cover distance between C and D as compare to that 
of on Tuesday. The distance between A and B is 40% less 
than that of between C and D. The distance between B and 
C is 50% more than that of between A and B. 
Note - There is not any halt or stoppage from the station A 
to D. 
 
46. Find the total time taken by train to cover distance 
from A to D on Tuesday? 
 
(a) 6 hours 
(b) 8 hours 
(c) 10 hours 
 
(d) 4 hours 
(e) 12 hours 
 
47. Find the difference between the distance from station 
A to B and from station C to D? 
 
(a) 60 km 
(b) 20 km 
(c) 80 km 
 
(d) 40 km 
(e) Can’t determined 
 
48. On Monday speed of train between stations B to C is 
50% more than speed of train between C to D and time 
taken to cover distance between B to C is 2 hours less