======================================================================
Exam: IBPS PO
Phase: Mains
Year: 2023
Shift: 1
Subject: Reasoning
Source: https://www.bankersadda.com/wp-content/uploads/multisite/2024/07/10152536/IBPS-PO-Mains-Previous-Year-Paper-2023.pdf
======================================================================

Q1. Which alphabet will come in (III, III) to make the meaningful word of row III and column III? 
(a) U 
(b) I 
(c) O 
(d) R 
(e) None of the above 
 
Q2. What is the difference between the total value of column III and total value of row 1? 
(a) 1 
(b) 3 
(c) 4 
(d) 2 
(e) None of the above 
 
Q3. Which meaningful word is formed in column III? 
(a) AREA 
(b) None of these 
(c) DRUM 
(d) CRUX 
(e) IRON 
 
Q4. What is the sum of the positional value of the letter in (I, IV) 
and (III, II), where the bracket represents (row, column)? 
(a) 6 
(b) 8 
(c) 5 
(d) 7 
(e) None of the above 
2 

 
 
Directions (5-5): The question below, consist of a question and three statements numbered as I, II 
and III given below it. You have to decide whether the data given in the statements are sufficient to 
answer the question or not. Read all statements and choose the most appropriate option. 
 
Q5. What is the code of town? 
I. “town is clean” is coded as “mp wy hz”, “small area city” is coded as “rt mh ap” and “town is good” is coded 
as “hz aw wy” 
II. “town is authentic” is coded as “wy ap hz”, “every city worth” is coded as “mt rt ng” and “no best city” is 
coded as “ax nr rt” 
III. “town is best” is coded as “wy nf hz”, “best small city” is coded as “rt sk ax” and “level in city” is coded as 
“wr rt uc” 
(a) If data in statement I alone is sufficient 
(b) If data in statement III alone is sufficient 
(c) If data either in statement I alone or in statement III alone is sufficient 
(d) If data in all statements i.e., I, II and III even together is not sufficient 
(e) If data in all statements i.e., I, II and III together is sufficient 
 
Directions (6-9): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given below: 
Twelve persons live in a five-floor building such that the bottommost floor is numbered as 1, the floor just 
above it is numbered as 2 and so on till the topmost floor is numbered as 5. Each floor has four flats – J, K, 
L and M from west to east respectively. Flat K is to the east of flat J and to the west of flat L which is to the 
west of flat M. 8 flats are vacant.  
Note: 1) At least two but not more than three persons live on each floor. The adjacent flats are not vacant. 
Adjacent flats are immediate left, immediate right, immediately above and immediately below. 
2) If it is given that A lives immediately above/immediately below B’s flat then either a vacant flat is 
between A and B or there is no vacant flat (no floor) between A and B. 
U lives on an even number floor below the 3rd floor. W lives to the east of U but neither in flat K nor in flat 
M. Only one floor gap is between W and P who lives to the west of S but not just west. U and P live in different 
named flats. R lives above S and adjacent to one of the vacant flats. R and W live in different named flats. O 
lives to the west of R and east of V. Q lives immediately below O’s flat. T lives to the east of Q. Only one floor 
gap between T and Y. T lives immediately above Y’s flat. Z lives just northwest of X. 
 
Q6. In which among the following flats minimum persons live? 
(a) Flat J 
(b) Flat K 
(c) Flat L 
(d) Flat M 
(e) Either flat K or flat L 
 
Q7. Who among the following lives in flat M on floor 3? 
(a) R 
(b) T 
(c) Z 
(d) Y 
(e) X 
3 

 
 
Q8. Which among the following statements is not true? 
(a) Z and P live in the same named flat 
(b) Only one flat is vacant on floor 2 
(c) P lives on an even-numbered floor 
(d) On floor 2, even number of persons live 
(e) None is true 
 
Q9. Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and thus form a group, then who among the 
following doesn’t belong to that group? 
(a) O 
(b) Q 
(c) U 
(d) X 
(e) P 
 
Q10. If we use the following alphabets from the words which are given in the options below: first 
vowel from the left end in the first word, the consonant which has the highest place value in the 
second word, the consonant which is second from the right end in the third word and immediately 
preceding consonant (in the fourth word) of the second vowel from the left end. Then which of the 
following options does not give a meaningful word? 
(a) Fire, Hand, Port, Atom  
(b) Read, Song, City, Hope 
(c) Open, Work, Wind, Time 
(d) Hear, Star, Fish, Life 
(e) None of these 
 
Directions (11-14): A word and number arrangement machine when given an input line of numbers 
and words rearranges them following a particular rule in each step. The following is an illustration 
of input and rearrangement: 
 
 
Q11. Which among the following statement(s) is/are correct? 
I. Three words start with the letter which comes after “M” in alphabetical series in step III 
II. More than two odd numbers are found in step V 
III. More than two even numbers are found in Step IV  
4 

 
(a) Both I and II 
(b) Both II and III 
(c) Both I and III 
(d) Only I 
(e) All I, II and III 
 
Q12. What is the difference between the third-highest number in Step II and the third-lowest 
number in Step IV? 
(a) 46540 
(b) 46527 
(c) 46590 
(d) 46630 
(e) 46780 
 
Q13. What is the sum of the numbers found in step V? 
(a) 898 
(b) 768 
(c) 548 
(d) 914 
(e) 998 
 
Q14. Which among the following element is third to the left of the element which is fourth from the 
right end in step III? 
(a) QBLF  
(b) 14 
(c) VMJSX  
(d) 12 
(e) MS 
 
Directions (15-18): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below:  
Thirteen boxes are kept in two stacks i.e., Stack 1 and Stack 2 where Stack 1 is in west of Stack 2. Each stack 
has seven shelves and one box is placed in each shelf. Stack 1 contains more boxes than Stack 2. Different 
numbers are printed on each of the boxes. If a box is kept between two boxes, then these boxes are kept in 
the same stack, unless stated otherwise. If a box is immediately above or below another box then they are 
in the same stack unless stated otherwise. One of the shelves is vacant in any of the stack. Adjacent shelf 
means just above, just below shelf of same stack and immediate left/right shelf of another stack.  
Box M is kept two shelves above the box which has number 51 on it. More than one odd number of boxes 
are kept below the box which has number 51 on it. Box M and the box which has number 21 on it is not 
kept in the topmost shelf. Two boxes are kept between Box L and the box which has the number 11 on it. 
Box M and Box L are kept in the adjacent shelf of different stacks. Box O’s shelf is below box M’s shelf and 
above the shelf of the box which has number 11 on it. Two boxes are kept between Box O and the box which 
has number 21 on it (no vacant shelf between them). Box M and Box O are not kept in the same stack. Box 
O and Box X do not have number 51 and number 21 on it respectively. Two boxes are kept between Box X 
and the box which has number 27 on it (no vacant shelf between them). Box M and the box which has 
number 27 on it, are neither kept in the adjacent shelf nor in the same shelf. Neither the topmost shelf is 
5 

 
vacant nor the shelf just below box O is vacant. Box X and the box which has number 21 on it are not kept 
in the adjacent shelf of Box L. Neither Box X and Box M are kept in the adjacent shelf nor the box which has 
number 27 on it is kept in the topmost shelf. The box which has number 58 on it is kept just above Box U 
and these boxes are kept below box M. Box U neither has number 11 on it nor it is placed in the adjacent 
shelf of Box O. Box U is kept below Box L (in different stack) but not on the bottommost shelf. One box is 
kept between Box T and Box Y. Box X and Box T are not kept in the adjacent shelf but kept in the same stack. 
Box U neither have number 51 on it nor it is kept just above Box X. Box T is neither kept in the topmost 
shelf nor has number 21 on it. Two boxes are kept between the Box Q and the box which has number 33 on 
it. Box L and Box O don’t have the number of multiple of 3 on it. Box Q is not placed just above Box X. Box Q 
is placed below the vacant shelf in same stack but not just below. Box R is kept below Box N but not just 
below. Box N and Box T are not placed in the same stack. One box is placed between Box R and the box 
which has number 29 on it. The box which has number 29 on it is neither kept in the east of Box Y nor 
below box Y. The number on Box L is two more than the number on Box R. The number on Box U is 5 less 
than the number on Box T. One box is placed between the box which has number 17 on it and Box C. One 
box is kept between the Box S and the box which has number 38 on it. Box C and Box R are not placed in 
the same stack. Box C is not placed in the topmost shelf. One Box is placed between the Box A and the box 
which has number 39 on it. The number on Box M is 8 more than the number on Box C.  
 
Q15. How many boxes are kept above box M in the same stack?  
(a) Two 
(b) One 
(c) Three  
(d) Four 
(e) None of these 
 
Q16. Which of the following numbers is printed on Box X? 
(a) 51 
(b) 58 
(c) 39 
(d) 27 
(e) None of these 
 
Q17. How many boxes are kept between Box T and Box C? 
(a) Two 
(b) Four 
(c) Three 
(d) One 
(e) None of these 
 
Q18. What is the sum of the numbers printed on Box Y and Box L? 
(a) 70 
(b) 72 
(c) 71 
(d) 75 
(e) None of these 
6 

 
 
Directions (19-20): Amid mounting pressure over the Centre to postpone the CBSE Board exams 
scheduled for next month, Prime Minister will hold a meeting with Education Minister and other 
important officials at 12 pm to discuss the issue. The government is likely to consider postponing 
the exams as Covid-19 cases continue to rise across states. Several state governments and 
Opposition leaders such as Arvind Kejriwal and Rahul Gandhi have been appealing to the Centre to 
postpone board exams. 
 
Q19. Which of the following substantiates the demand raised by Opposition leaders? 
(I) Several crowded markets in many states have been closed after Covid-19 guidelines. 
(II) Many state governments have postponed the state board exams for X and XII classes as cases of Covid-
19 continue to rise. 
(III) Cases has been rising but elections in many states are conducted. 
(a) Only II and III 
(b) Only III 
(c) Only I and II 
(d) Only I and III 
(e) All of three 
 
Q20. Which of the following can be inferred from the above statement? 
(I) Arvind Kejriwal is considered as opposition leader for central government. 
(II) If Board exam will be conducted, it may act as catalyst in rising number of cases for Covid-19. 
(III) Only Central government has the right to postpone state government exam. 
(a) Only III 
(b) Only II and III 
(c) Only I and II 
(d) Only II 
(e) None of them 
 
Directions (21-24): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below- 
Ten persons A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and J sit in two rectangular tables X and Y. Three of them like horror novel, 
three likes thriller and four of them likes romance novel. 
Four persons sit in table X and remaining sits in table Y. The person sits in middle faces outside the centre 
and the person sit in corner face inside the centre. Persons sits in table X sit in middle and in Table Y four 
seats are placed in middle and four seats are placed in the corner. Two seats are vacant in Table Y. 
D sits in table X. J does not sit in table Y. G sits immediate left of J and neither of them like thriller. The one 
who likes romance does not sit in the middle of table Y. D likes romance and sits opposite to G. E likes 
romance and sit on table Y. Both the immediate neighbours of E like thriller. More than three seats between 
the persons who likes thriller. A sits immediate left of the one who likes thriller. F sits third to the left of A. 
C sits in table X. Two persons sits between D and J. B does not like thriller and romance. Two persons sit 
between D and the one who likes thriller. The persons who likes thriller does not sit in the corner. I sits 2nd 
to the left of a vacant seat. Both the vacant seats are not adjacent two each other. The one who likes horror 
sits immediate right of the one who likes romance in table Y. A doesn’t like Horror. 
7 

 
 
Q21. If J and H change their novels then who sits 3rd to the left of the one who sits immediate right 
of B? 
(a) The person who likes Thriller novel  
(b) The person who likes Romance novel 
(c) The person who likes Horror 
(d) The person who likes either horror or thriller novel  
(e) Can’t be determined  
 
Q22.Which of the following statements is true? 
(a) G sits in the corner of Table X. 
(b) E sits immediate left of the one who likes horror novels. 
(c) B likes romance novels. 
(d) I sits immediate right of F. 
(e) F sits in the middle of Table Y. 
 
Q23.Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and hence form a group. Who among the 
following does not belong to that group? 
(a) H 
(b) J 
(c) I 
(d) F 
(e) C 
 
Q24.Which among the following pair of persons sits near to the vacant seats in Table Y? 
(a) H and G 
(b) F and I 
(c) I and C 
(d) C and H 
(e) F and H 
 
Directions (25-27): In one of the historical reforms of the economy of India, Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 
notes were banned. This was one of the boldest movements by the Government of India announced 
over a 40-minute speech. Most of the industry and commoners alike reacted to this decision to curb 
corruption with overwhelming support. Whereas some sections are of the opinion that it is a 
draconian scheme causing hardships to people. A recent study had pegged India’s black-market 
economy at over Rs 30 lakh crore or about 20 percent of total GDP. This is even bigger than the GDP 
of countries like Thailand and Argentina. 
 
Q25. Rather getting support from most of the industry, what would have been the reason that some 
of them declared it as a draconian scheme? 
(I) It was declared without giving time to people to withdraw ample cash for their use. 
(II) It had caused certain hardships in daily activities. 
(III) It stopped the earning of black money for majority of the people. 
8 

 
(a) Only II and III 
(b) Only III 
(c) Only I and II 
(d) Only I and III 
(e) All of three 
 
Q26. Which of the following can be assumed from the above statement? 
(I) After this historical decision, corruption rate would have been gone down in India. 
(II) India is ranked among top 5 big economic country. 
(III) Many of the countrymen wanted to corruption and black marketing should be reduced. 
(a) Only I and III 
(b) Only II 
(c) All of three 
(d) Only II and III 
(e) None 
 
Q27. Which of the following negates the motive behind the decision taken by Government of India? 
(I) In recent survey, India falls with 25 rank in terms of corruption among world. 
(II) Mr X, the former CEO of a reputed company has been arrested in corruption charge of Rs. 15 thousand 
crores. 
(III) CBI has raided the house of top businessmen of different states and has seized a total of 2 lakh crores 
of black money. 
(a) Only I 
(b) Only I and III 
(c) Only II 
(d) Only II and III 
(e) All of three 
 
Directions (28-30): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below: 
Eight persons work in two different departments i.e., Research and Agriculture and all of them get different 
marks in the Research and Agriculture sessions organized by organization. Each of them has different years 
of experience (in whole number) in their departments. They have qualification in either HR or diploma. No 
one has more experience than 11 years. Equal number of persons work in both departments. 
A and D have same qualification. B gets twice marks as the experience of F and doesn’t qualification in HR. 
F has twice experience than E who has more experience than A. F did Diploma same as C. A’s marks is two 
more than B’s marks but not multiple of 7. C and D have different qualification. The one who gets marks in 
multiple of 8 works in agriculture department. G’s experience is equivalent to smallest two digits prime 
number. F have 4 marks less than E. G’s experience and C’s Mark are not equal. G gets the marks which is 
3/2 of the marks get by A. C’s experience is five times of A’s experience. The marks get by D is twice of C’s 
experience. A and D work in the same department but not as B. A gets marks which is twice of C marks. C 
and F work in same department but not as A’s department. A has even number of experiences. B has more 
experience than H but less than D and all have prime number experience. E and H work in same department. 
E, G and H have same qualification but different than B. H marks is 9 more than E and just less than D. 
9 

 
 
Q28. Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and thus form a group then who among the 
following doesn’t belong to the group? 
(a) A- HR 
(b) B-Diploma 
(c) D-HR 
(d) F-Diploma 
(e) H-Diploma 
 
Q29. What is the sum of the experience of A, C, F and H? 
(a) 33 years 
(b) 28 years 
(c) 23 years 
(d) 39 years 
(e) 26 years 
 
Q30. Which among the following statement is not true? 
(a) G has maximum years of experience among all 
(b) Only three persons are qualified in Diploma 
(c) A gets the fourth highest marks 
(d) More than three persons have more experience than D 
(e) None is true 
 
Directions (31-34): Read the given information and answer the questions based on it: 
There are four platforms in a railway station. The platforms open at different time one after the other such 
that platform 1 opens at 5am, platform 2 opens at 6am, platform 3 opens at 7am and platform 8 opens at 
8am. Some trains arrive at these platforms one by one at a gap of 1 hour i.e., if train X arrived at platform 1 
at 5am, then train Y will arrive at platform 1 at 6am. Multiple trains can arrive at single platform but having 
1 hour gap in their arrival.  
Read the following statements to get the desired output: 
1. Train M is not the single train to arrive on a platform.  
2. Train D arrives just before train B on the same platform.  
3. One hour arrival gap between train G and train H on the same platform.  
4. No train arrives after train C which also arrives on one of the platforms at 6am.  
5. Arrival time of train G and train B is same where train B arrives on platform 1.  
6. The train which first arrives at 5am on platform 1, next arrives at 7am on platform 3.  
7. Train K arrives at platform 1 before train S, on platform 2.  
8. Train H arrives at platform 2 at 7am.  
 
Q31. How many trains arrive on all the platforms (consider a train only once)? 
(a) Six 
(b) Seven 
(c) Nine  
(d) Eight 
(e) None of the above 
10 

 
 
Q32. Which of the following combination is correct for the train which arrives just before M on same 
platform? 
(a) Platform 1, 7am 
(b) Platform 3, 7am 
(c) Platform 1, 5am 
(d) Platform 2, 6am 
(e) Platform 2, 7am 
 
Q33. Which of the following train arrives at last on platform 1? 
(a) The train which arrives just after train D 
(b) The train which arrives at same time with train S on different platform 
(c) The train which arrives two hours after train K 
(d) The train which also stops on platform 2 at 7am 
(e) None of the above 
 
Q34. Which of the following statement is not true? 
I. Train S arrives at last on one of the platforms  
II. Train K arrives after train B on same platform 
III. Only two train arrives on more than one platform 
(a) Only I is true 
(b) None is true 
(c) Only II and III is true 
(d) Only I and II is true 
(e) Only III is true 
 
Directions (35-35): Below in each question are given two Statement I and II. These statements may 
be either independent causes or may be effects of independent causes or a common cause. One of 
these statements may be the effect of the other statement. Read both the statements and decide 
which of the following answer choice correctly depicts the relationship between these two 
statements. Give answer 
 
Q35. I. The central government has started to build 500 beds with the help of DRDO in Mumbai after 5000 
covid cases come in a single day. 
II. Amid surge in covid cases two players of RCB have withdrawn their name form ongoing IPL cricket 
match. 
(a) If Statement I is the cause and Statement II is its effect. 
(b) If Statement II is the cause and Statement, I is its effect. 
(c) If both the Statements I and II are independent causes. 
(d) If both the Statements I and II are effects of independent causes. 
(e) If both the Statement I and II are effects of some common causes. 
11 

 
 
Directions (36-39): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below: 
A certain number of persons sit in a linear row such that some of them face north while some of them face 
south. Some of them like different cities. 
B sits at the fourth position from one of the extreme ends. The one who likes Hamilton sits fourth to the left 
of B. The number of persons sit between B and the one who likes Hamilton is one more than the number of 
persons sit between E and the one who likes Hamilton. Only two persons sit between E and F. F neither 
likes Hamilton nor sits to the right of B. The one who likes Tokyo sits third to the left of F. B and F face 
opposite directions. K sits adjacent to both H and F. The immediate neighbours of K face the opposite 
direction as K faces. The number of persons sit between K and the one who likes Tokyo is multiple of 3. The 
number of persons sits between H and J is thrice of the persons sit to the right of H. J sits to the left of F. 
Only one person sits between H and I. Only three persons sit between D and J. Only one person sits to the 
right of D. The one who likes Boston sits fourth to the left of D. One person sits between J and the one who 
likes Houston who faces north. G sits second to the left of J and both face same direction. The one who likes 
Madrid sits third to the left of E. The one who likes Toronto sits second to the left of I.