======================================================================
Exam: IBPS PO
Phase: Mains
Year: 2021
Shift: 1
Subject: Quant
Source: https://www.bankersadda.com/wp-content/uploads/multisite/2022/09/22123259/Formatted-IBPS-PO-Mains-Previous-Year-Paper-2021-Questions-with-Solutions-1.pdf
======================================================================

Q36. Which among the following building is second to the left of C? 
(a) B 
(b) E 
(c) A 
(d) D 
(e) None of these 
 
Q37. Which among the following combination is correct? 
(a) A-13 
(b) O-23 
(c) D-18 
(d) L-19 
(e) J-16 
 
Q38. Which among the following statement is true?  
(a) M has the least number of offices 
(b) A is constructed fourth to the right of E 
(c) D faces the building constructed adjacent to L 
(d) N has more offices than B 
(e) J and K are constructed adjacent to each other 
 
Q39. Which among the following building has the maximum offices? 
(a) L 
(b) Building adjacent to D 
(c) A 
(d) The one which is constructed immediate right of F 
(e) J 
 
Q40. We have five words given below such that one letter of each word is underlined. Find how many 
meaningful words can be formed by using the letters (only once) which are underlined in each given word? 
I. Practice     II. Masters   III. Conspiracy  
IV. Theory  
V. Officials 
(a) One 
(b) Two 
(c) Three 
(d) More than three 
(e) None 
 
11 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Direction (41-45): Read the following information carefully and answer the questions given below: 
 
Some students attend the lectures and they all are arranged in three parallel rows such that row1 is north 
of row2 and row 3 is south of row 2. Each row has 8 seats. All the students face north direction. Some seats 
are vacant in each row. Twelve students- Allen, Fame, Emma, Alpha, Coco, Nick, Ivory, London, Olive, 
Unique, Jack and Den who attend the lectures are divided into two classes i.e., class A and class B. The 
students whose name start with a vowel belongs to class A and the rest belong to class B. The students in 
class A are sitting in the alternative seats from the second seat of Row 1 when counts from the left end 
according to the dictionary order followed by class B students who are sitting in reverse alphabetical order. 
After row 1, students are sitting in row 2 then in row 3 following the same rule.  All students are sitting in 
the alternative seats only. Now the students sit around two circular tables i.e., Table1 and Table2 and all 
are facing the centre. Students belong to Class A sit in table 1and the rest of them sit in table 2. 
Conditions for table 1: Allen sits opposite to the one who sits second from the left end in row 2. The one 
who sits right of olive in row 2 sits second to the right of Allen. Alpha doesn’t sit adjacent to Olive and sit 
opposite to Emma. 
Conditions for table 2: London sits second to the right of the one who sits adjacent to Unique.  The one who 
sits at extreme end sit third to the left of London. Jack sits opposite to Den and doesn’t sit adjacent to Nick. 
 
Q41. Who among the following sits fourth to the left of London in rows-based arrangement? 
(a) Olive 
(b) Unique 
(c) Allen 
(d) Fame 
(e) Coco 
 
Q42. Who among the following sits opposite to Coco in circular arrangement? 
(a) Fame 
(b)The one who sits adjacent to Nick 
(c) The one who sits at extreme end in row 2 
(d) Either (a) or (b) 
(e) None of these 
 
Q43. The number of persons sit to the right of London in row arrangement is same as the number of 
persons sits between Allen and ____ in circular arrangement? 
(a) Alpha 
(b) Olive 
(c) Ivory 
(d) Emma 
(e) Both (a) and (c) 
 
Q44. Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and thus form a group. Who among the following 
does not belong to the group? 
(a) Allen 
(b) Alpha 
(c) Ivory 
(d) Emma 
(e) Nick 
 
12 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Q45. Which among the following statement is true? 
(a) Fame doesn’t sit opposite to Nick. 
(b) Allen and Olive sit in the same row 
(c) Unique sits second to the right of Olive in row 2 
(d) Den sits in row 2 
(e) Coco doesn’t sit at the extreme end 
 
Directions (46-50): Read the following passage and answer the questions given below. Some words are 
highlighted to help you answer some of the questions. 
 
We are now living among history’s very first “AI” generation. From the Alexas they converse with, to their 
robot playmates, to the YouTube wormholes they disappear into, the children and adolescents of today are 
born into a world increasingly powered by virtual reality and artificial intelligence (AI). AI is not only (I) 
revamping what humans can do, it is shaping our behaviors, our preferences, our perceptions of the world 
and of ourselves. Older people still remember life before AI and the digital world - our references, anchors 
and pole stars pre-date the fourth Industrial Revolution. Not so for the millions of children and adolescents 
who were born into it. One of the most pressing concerns is that not everyone can tap into the 
opportunities offered by this transformation. According to UNICEF and the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), as many as two-thirds of the world’s children do not have access to the 
Internet at home. 
In the old-fashioned physical world, we evolved norms and standards to protect children. For instance, 
there are policies and protocols for a child traveling alone as an unaccompanied minor. Parents are 
understandably ___________(II)_________ to let their children be photographed by the media, and in many 
countries, news outlets blur children’s faces to protect them. While video gaming and chat forums offer an 
online space for children to socialize with their friends, multiple reports identify such virtual playgrounds 
as a source of child predators. Short of banning screen time entirely, parents are hard-pressed to keep tabs 
on just what their children are doing online, and with whom. With online homework, this has become even 
more difficult. Even if this is an ancillary consequence of the underlying business model, the damage is 
done - children, from a tender age through adolescence, are becoming digitally addicted. 
Similarly, right when children and youth are forming their initial views of the world, they are being sucked 
into virtual deep space, including the universe of fake news and conspiracy theories. (III) Many AI toys 
now come pre-programmed with their own (A) amusing and voice, and they may provide youngsters with 
(B) personality and creative options, with some even (C) cognitive improved reading, social skills, and 
(D) fostering development. All this is thrown at our children just when they are starting to try to make 
sense of who they are and the world they live in; right when it is so important to help them understand and 
appreciate different perspectives, preferences, beliefs and customs, to build bridges of understanding and 
empathy and goodwill. 
 
Q46. The highlighted word in part (I) of the first paragraph may or may not have been used correctly. 
Choose the most important word from the given options which can be used to replace the highlighted word. 
If no replacement is required, then choose option (e) as your answer choice. 
(a) slumping 
(b) tumbling 
(c) worsening 
(d) inflaming 
(e) No replacement required 
 
13 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Q47. Choose the most appropriate antonym of the word ‘PRESSING’, as highlighted in the given passage. 
(a) pivotal 
(b) drastic 
(c) trivial 
(d) critical 
(e) None of these 
 
Q48. Choose the most appropriate word from the following options to fill in the blank (II), as highlighted 
in the given passage. 
(a) wishing 
(b) earnest 
(c) reluctant 
(d) craving 
(e) esurient 
 
Q49. Choose the most appropriate synonym of the word ‘ANCILLARY’, as highlighted in the given passage. 
(a) subsidiary 
(b) auxiliary 
(c) adjuvant 
(d) accessory 
(e) All of these  
 
Q50. In sentence (III) of the last paragraph, a few words have been highlighted and jumbled. You are 
required to choose the correct sequence of the highlighted words from the options given below. 
(a) CADB 
(b) BADC 
(c) DBAC 
(d) ABDC 
(e) CBAD 
 
Directions (51-55): Read the following passage and answer the questions given below. Some words are 
highlighted to help you answer some of the questions. 
 
Tropical deforestation is one of the great challenges facing humanity. If we don’t slow it down soon, the 
chances of avoiding disastrous climate change, species loss and the disruption of indigenous and traditional 
people’s cultures grow slimmer. And this rapid deceleration will be possible only if the governments, farm 
sectors, rural communities, businesses and civil societies of tropical forest regions devise and implement 
effective strategies. In the long term, the goal of taming deforestation must be embedded in public policies, 
programs, business transactions and culture. To put it bluntly, political leaders who embrace the goal of 
taming deforestation must be electable. The jurisdictional approach can help to translate unilateral 
corporate deforestation pledges into collaborative agreements with local governments and farm sectors, 
building the political case for slowing deforestation.  
14 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
In a jurisdictional approach, the unit of performance is a landscape with policy-relevant boundaries – 
political geographies such as a state, province, district or an entire nation. This is the unit of performance 
that can effectively bring together multi-stakeholders on the appropriate pathway to sustainable 
development. In Brazil – a shining example of a successful jurisdictional approach to slow tropical 
deforestation – progress has been possible because political forces were pushing in the right direction. The 
approach was jurisdictional because success was defined as a decline in deforestation for the entire 
Brazilian Amazon region and for all types of land use. The Government used command-and-control 
measures to slow deforestation, but it also broadened its political base by paving its all-weather motorways 
providing access to Pacific markets. It also attracted new low-carbon industries to set up shop through 
innovative incentive systems. 
The stage is also set to attract private financial investments into new low-carbon industries and farmer 
support programs as the risks associated with rampant deforestation, illegal land-use practices and labor 
infractions are diminished. In many ways, a political case for slowing Amazon deforestation was handed to 
President Lula on a silver platter. He came into office in 2003 with a mandate to deepen Brazil’s 
international credibility just as Amazon deforestation was skyrocketing, triggering international outrage 
and a diplomatic headache for the new president. It was in this favorable political context that Lula 
empowered his environment minister to draw on the most powerful branches of the government – 
including the army and central bank – to crack down on illegal deforestation and logging in the Amazon. 
These formal designations further weakened the land-grabbing schemes that were driving deforestation. 
 
Q51. What consequence did the use of command-and-control mechanisms by the government have? 
(a) It resulted in environmental protection by halting deforestation. 
(b) It contributed to the establishment of new low-carbon industries. 
(c) It successfully brought individuals together on the correct course. 
(d) Only (a) and (b)  
(e) Only (b) and (c)  
 
Q52. Choose the most appropriate antonym of the word ‘EMBRACE’, as highlighted in the given passage. 
(a) enclasp 
(b) repudiate 
(c) espouse 
(d) underpin 
(e) stimulate 
 
Q53. What will be the repercussions if tropical deforestation continues unabated? 
(a) Unrestrained deforestation will eventually result in the extinction of species. 
(b) Climate change will have a high probability of being catastrophic. 
(c) There will be a breakdown in traditional cultures and people. 
(d) Only (a) and (c)  
(e) All of these 
 
15 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Q54. Choose the most appropriate synonym of the word ‘OUTRAGE’, 
as highlighted in the given passage. 
(a) reconcile 
(b) indignation 
(c) propitiate 
(d) appease 
(e) conciliate 
 
Q55. What role will private financial investments in innovative low-
carbon industries play in maintaining the ecological balance? 
(a) It aids in reducing the dangers associated with massive 
deforestation. 
(b) It facilitates the reduction of unlawful land-use operations. 
(c) It contributes to the reduction of international indignation. 
(d) Only (a) and (b)  
(e) Only (a) and (c) 
 
Directions (56-59): In each of the following questions, a sentence with four highlighted words has been 
given. One of these highlighted words may or may not have been used unnecessarily in the given sentences. 
You are required to choose the word that is redundant and gives a superfluous meaning. If all of the 
highlighted words are essential for the contextual meaning of the sentence, then choose option (e) as your 
answer choice. 
 
Q56. Water-conservation and water-harvesting methods (A) that do not require the construction (B) of 
a dam are fallacious approaches (C) that have not been adequately (D) examined in the management of 
water resources. 
(a) A 
(b) B 
(c) C 
(d) D 
(e) None of these 
 
Q57. Regional hospitals (A) at the secondary level within the government sector are essential (B) in 
urban facilities to ensure (C) the needs of the population during critical (D) situations. 
(a) A 
(b) B 
(c) C 
(d) D 
(e) None of these 
 
Q58. The central government has re-issued an ordinance (A) forming an air quality control (B) 
commission, which worries concern (C) about the procedure of re-issuing ordinances without getting 
them ratified (D) by the Parliament. 
(a) A 
(b) B 
(c) C 
(d) D 
(e) None of these 
 
16 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Q59. The world appears to have gleaned (A) little from the first wave, which culminated (B) last year and 
decimated (C) the country, while a more ferocious (C) second wave is ravaging the country. 
(a) A 
(b) B 
(c) C 
(d) D 
(e) None of these 
 
Directions (60-63): In each of the following questions, a contextually meaningful sentence has been given. 
Three paragraphs have been placed next to each sentence, which may or may not be relevant to the context 
of the given sentence. You are required to select the most appropriate combination of paragraphs from 
which the given sentence can be inferred. 
 
Q60. The reasonable path is to enable both economic output and rapid health response, as evidenced by 
the rate of infection spread. 
(i) His address to the nation, delivered amid a roaring storm of viral outbreaks, was intended to reinforce 
the message about the commitment of the government to reversing economic decline and expanding 
healthcare services. 
(ii) To be clear, the fact that this was formerly the case does not imply that government control of 
educational institutions must presently be maintained. However, the circumstances that existed at the time 
the government passed its first endowment statute have not changed significantly. 
(iii) Regulatory reform proponents often point to the state's attitude to other activities. However, an 
examination of the associated laws reveals that the government also has significant supervisory 
responsibility for the management of educational properties. 
(a) Only (i) 
(b) Only (i) and (iii) 
(c) Only (iii) 
(d) Only (i) and (ii) 
(e) Only (ii) and (iii) 
 
Q61. There have been no further guidelines created to describe these concepts or specify their constituents 
in order to assist the appointments. 
(i) Various qualifications and constitutional provisions for the freedom of conscience and the right to freely 
proclaim and disseminate religious practice according to public order were established with these 
objectives in mind. 
(ii) Recruiting agencies are required by the Court and the Model Police Act to shortlist candidates based 
on length of service, range of experience, and a performance evaluation of the candidates over the previous 
ten years. 
(iii) Reforms in this area must include two elements. The first is that the government's selection and 
dismissal powers should be delegated to an independent oversight body, of which the government is a 
component. 
(a) Only (iii) 
(b) Only (i) and (iii) 
(c) Only (ii) 
(d) Only (i) and (ii) 
(e) Only (ii) and (iii) 
 
17 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Q62. Following a supply outage, oxygen levels in numerous hospitals in the city fell to dangerously low 
levels. After a massive intervention, supplies were restored by late evening. 
(i) According to the Indian Council of Medical Research, only a small percentage of those who were 
vaccinated tested positive. These outbreaks of illness did not, however, call into question the efficacy of 
immunization as the vaccines clearly protect against disease. 
(ii) Hospitals in the city may soon face oxygen shortages as well. The Centre has a control team that will 
settle disagreements between states over oxygen delivery. To enable the smooth passing of oxygen trucks, 
green corridors have been established. 
(iii) After a leak in a medical oxygen tank disrupted the availability at a hospital, several patients on life 
support suffocated. According to the State Health Minister, the leak was caused by a valve malfunction, and 
a high-level investigation has been ordered. 
(a) Only (iii) 
(b) Only (i) and (iii) 
(c) Only (i) and (ii) 
(d) Only (ii) 
(e) Only (ii) and (iii) 
 
Q63. It has been brought to our attention that, despite the summer break, several private schools continue 
to use the regular online learning approach. 
(i) Farmers in Punjab and Haryana have begun receiving the minimum support price payment directly in 
their bank accounts for the first time under the Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme, with wheat harvesting in 
full swing. 
(ii) The World Press Freedom Index has placed India in 142nd place out of 180 countries. This is despite 
the fact that an index monitoring cell worked for a year under the guidance of the Cabinet Secretary to 
enhance the ranks. 
(iii) Considering many private schools are continuing online classes despite the decree declaring summer 
break, the Directorate issued a circular stating that all online learning activities must be discontinued 
during the summer vacation. 
(a) Only (iii) 
(b) Only (i) and (iii) 
(c) Only (i) and (ii) 
(d) Only (ii) and (iii) 
(e) (c) Only (ii) 
 
Directions (64-67): In the following question, two separate sentences with a few highlighted words have 
been given. Answer the questions, based on the given sentences. 
 
Q64. The highlighted words in the given sentences may or may not have been used in the correct sequence. 
You are required to choose the correct sequence of words to form meaningful sentences. 
(A) The first wave of the pandemic attempts (A) the world revealed (B) the vulnerabilities in the global 
(C) healthcare system. 
(B) Hospitals have been replenish (D) for nearly a year, and no throughout (E) have been made to 
swamped (F) medical oxygen supplies. 
(a) BCEFDA 
(b) FBECAD 
(c) EFBDAC 
(d) EBCFAD 
(e) CFEDBA 
 
18 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Q65. You are required to choose the most appropriate connector from the given options which can be used 
to connect both sentences to form a coherent paragraph. 
(a) even 
(b) yet  
(c) since 
(d) then 
(e) for 
 
Q66. The highlighted words in the given sentences may or may not have been used in the correct sequence. 
You are required to choose the correct sequence of words to form meaningful sentences. 
(A) There has been a achieving (A) of headlines this week in the build-up structured (B) by the US 
regarding whether India should sector (C) a net-zero emissions target. 
(B) Decarbonizing the power declare (D), which is India's single largest source of greenhouse gas 
emissions (E), is a critical step towards rush (F) net-zero emissions. 
(a) FBDCEA 
(b) BDFEAC 
(c) DBFACE 
(d) CBFEAD 
(e) FDBECA 
 
Q67. You are required to choose the most appropriate connector from the given options which can be used 
to connect both sentences to form a coherent paragraph. 
(a) despite 
(b) although 
(c) however 
(d) consequently 
(e) moreover 
 
Directions (68-71): In the following paragraph, a few phrases have been highlighted, each of which has 
been numbered. These highlighted phrases may or may not have been used correctly in terms of contextual 
meaning and grammatical accuracy. Select the most appropriate phrase from the given options to replace 
the incorrect one. Choose option (e) as your answer choice if the highlighted phrases are grammatically 
correct and don't need to be replaced. 
 
Enhancing the efficiency of electricity use are an important complement (68) to decarbonizing the 
electricity supply. Growing urbanization and uptake of electricity services offer a good opportunity to 
(69) shape energy consumption within buildings through proactive measures. Cooling needs are expected 
to increase rapid with rising (70) incomes and temperatures. Air conditioners, fans and refrigerators 
together consume about 60% of the electricity in households. Today, the average fan sold in the market 
consumes more than twice (71) what an efficient fan does, and an average refrigerator is about 35% 
more. India can leverage this transition to as an opportunity too (27) become a global leader in the 
production of clean appliances. 
 
19 
Adda247 | No. 1 APP for Banking & SSC Preparation 

 
Q68. (a) is an important complement 
(b) are the important complement 
(c) is the importance complement 
(d) are an important complements 
(e) No replacement required 
 
Q69. (a) offers a good opportunity to 
(b) offering good opportunity to 
(c) offers good opportunity for 
(d) offered good opportunity to 
(e) No replacement required 
 
Q70. (a) for increase rapidly with rising 
(b) to increased rapid with rising 
(c) to increase rapidly with rising 
(d) to increase rapidly with risen 
(e) No replacement required