======================================================================
Exam: SBI PO
Phase: Mains
Year: 2023
Shift: 1
Subject: Reasoning
Source: https://www.bankersadda.com/wp-content/uploads/multisite/2024/09/24150241/SBI-PO-Mains-Previous-Year-Paper-2023.pdf
======================================================================

Q1. Who among the following is wife of K? 
(a) The one who sits just right of M 
(b) The one who faces E 
(c) The one who likes cherry 
(d) The one who faces the one who likes Orchid 
(e) The one who faces M’s husband 
 
Q2. U’s wife likes which of the following fruit? 
(a) Apple 
(b) Mango 
(c) Papaya 
(d) Orange 
(e) Cherry 
 
Q3. What is the position of T with respect to the one who likes 
Lily? 
(a) Immediate right 
(b) Second to the left 
(c) Third to the left 
(d) Second to the right 
(e) Fourth to the left 
2 

 
 
Q4. The person who faces S’s wife likes which of the following flower? 
(a) Tulip 
(b) Orchid 
(c) Daisy 
(d) Lily 
(e) Rose 
 
Q5. Who among the following sits at exactly middle of row 1?  
(a) The one who likes mango  
(b) The one who faces R’s husband 
(c) The one who sits second to the left of E’s wife 
(d) The one who faces T 
(e) The one who sits adjacent to B 
 
Q6. Eight different letters are arranged to form a meaningful word. Only two letters are arranged 
between P and E. R is arranged adjacent to E. Only two letters are arranged between R and L which 
is not adjacent to P. Only one letter is arranged between E and O. W is arranged adjacent to O. F and 
U are the two letters of the meaningful word. If only one meaningful word can be formed from the 
fourth, fifth, seventh and eighth letters (using each letter once only) from the left end of the word 
then which among the following is the second letter from the right end of the word. If no meaningful 
word is formed mark X as your answer if more than one such word is formed mark Y as your answer. 
(a) L 
(b) U 
(c) Y 
(d) X 
(e) R 
 
Q7. Statement: 200 workers are hired in the newly opened factory. Some of them are caught stealing 
products from the factory. 
Course of action:  
I. The owner of the company should immediately fire those workers who are caught stealing products. 
II. Warning should be issued to those employees who are caught stealing products. 
Give answer: 
(a) if only I follows. 
(b) if only II follows.  
(c) if either I or II follows. 
(d) if neither I nor II follows.  
(e) if both I and II follow. 
 
Q8. Statements: On 1st May 2020 the central government has decided to declare “Covid-19” as a 
notifiable disease under the Epidemics act, 1987. Government will take legal action if patient or 
family members of patients do not isolate and inform concerned authorities. 
I. Efforts should be made to effectively implement the act. 
II. The cases of punishment should be propagated through mass media so that more people become aware 
of the stern action. 
Which of the following course of action does logically follow? 
(a) If only I follows 
(b) None follows except II 
(c) If either I or II follows 
(d) If neither I nor II follows 
(e) If both I and II follow 
3 

 
 
Directions (9-13): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given below- 
Ten persons attend the seminar in two different months i.e., June and July in consecutive two weeks. Each 
month has one week. First week start from Monday to Sunday. 
Note: P attends the seminar on double digit odd prime numbered date in the given month. No two adjacent 
days are vacant. 
R attends the seminar two days before P. One person attends the seminar between P and I who attends the 
seminar in the month having odd number of days. I and Q attend the seminar on the same day. J attends 
the seminar after Q and before R on an even numbered date. As many persons attend the seminar between 
J and R as between I and L. L attends the seminar on an even numbered date. O attends the seminar three 
days after L. L attends after I. No one attends the seminar between O and K who attends the seminar on an 
odd numbered date. As many persons attend the seminar after K as before Q. M attends the seminar in the 
month having maximum number of days. N attends before Q.  
 
Q9. How many persons attend the seminar between N and I? 
(a) Four 
(b) Six 
(c) Three 
(d) Five 
(e) Seven 
 
Q10. Which among the following pair of persons attend the seminar on same day? 
(a) N, O 
(b) I, K 
(c) L, R 
(d) J, L 
(e) K, Q 
 
Q11. Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and form a group. Who among the following 
person does not belong to the group? 
(a) O 
(b) N 
(c) K 
(d) M 
(e) I 
 
Q12. On which among the following date and month N attends the seminar? 
(a) 24th June 
(b) 5th July 
(c) 30th June 
(d) 1st July 
(e) 3rd July 
 
Q13. Which among the following statement(s) is/are true? 
I. No one attends the seminar on 6th July 
II. More than six persons attend the seminar between after R 
III. O attends the seminar on Sunday 
(a) Both I and II 
(b) Both II and III 
(c) Only I  
(d) Both I and III 
(e) Only III 
4 

 
 
Directions (14-17): A word and number arrangement machine when given an input line of words 
and numbers rearranges them following a particular rule in each step. The following is an 
illustration of input and rearrangement. 
 
Input: temperature compensated 58 67 sources growing 33 29 century 38 62 despite 
Step I: 201 temperature compensated 58 sources growing 33 29 38 62 despite ‘-----’ 
Step II: 124 201 temperature 58 sources growing 33 29 38 despite ‘-----’ date 
Step III: 116 124 201 temperature sources growing 33 29 38 ‘-----’ date ‘-----’  
Step IV: 76 116 124 201 temperature sources 33 29 ‘-----’ date ‘-----’ wing 
Step V: 66 76 116 124 201 temperature 29 ‘-----’ date ‘-----’ wing ‘-----’ 
Step VI: 87 66 76 116 124 201 ‘-----’ date ‘-----’ wing ‘-----’ true 
And step VI is the last step of the arrangement. As per the above rule followed in the above steps, find out 
in each of the following questions the appropriate step for the given input: 
Input: 41 countries 19 humanity 28 breached 46 fuels 51 36 collectively particular 
 
Q14. How many even numbers in the right of humanity in step III? 
(a) Three 
(b) Two 
(c) Four 
(d) One 
(e) None  
 
Q15. Which of the following pair of new words are formed? 
(a) Stay, Tune 
(b) Grow, Rise 
(c) Tiny, Slue 
(d) Pure, Hear 
(e) None of these  
 
Q16. In which of the following step “humanity 28 particular” is found in the same order of the given 
input? 
(a) Step I 
(b) Step II 
(c) Step III 
(d) Step IV 
(e) Step V 
 
Q17. Which of the following is the penultimate step? 
(a) 56 72 32 92 102 19 particular ‘-----’ ‘-----’ rise slue tiny  
(b) 56 72 123 92 102 19 particular ‘-----’ rise slue‘-----’ tiny 
(c) 56 72 123 102 92 19 particular ‘-----’ ‘-----’ rise slue tiny 
(d) 56 72 123 92 102 19 particular ‘-----’ ‘-----’ rise slue tiny 
(e) None of these 
5 

 
 
Directions (18-22): Read the given information carefully and answer the questions based on it: 
Twelve persons A to L belong to four different cities. These four cities are located in two countries i.e., two 
cities in each country. The two countries are Italy and Spain, the four cities are Valencia, Granada, Verona 
and Genoa. Minimum two and maximum four persons belong to each city. All the persons like different 
colors i.e. red, green, blue, pink, teal, cyan, grey, yellow, olive, black, maroon and white. The information 
about persons, countries, cities and color is not used in the same sequence as given.  
J is neither from Italy nor likes red. The one who likes green belong to the city of G who is neither from Italy 
nor belongs to C’s city. D (who does not like grey) and the one who likes yellow are from same country. F 
and the one who likes pink belong to same country but not from same city. K and the one who likes olive 
are from Spain but belong to different cities. F is from Granada but not from Spain. D does not like maroon 
but belong to the city of the one who likes grey. The number of persons belong to H’s city are less than the 
number of persons belong to Valencia. C and the one who likes red are from Spain but not belong to Verona. 
One of the persons who has vowel name likes cyan. A likes black but neither belong to Genoa nor to 
Valencia. H and E are from same country, but they neither are from F’s country nor like red. One of the 
persons from Genoa likes blue but he is not C. The person who likes maroon belong to Valencia from where 
odd number of persons belong. Verona is not the city of Italy. B and the one who likes teal belong to the 
city of the one who likes black. 
 
Q18. What is the ratio of the persons from Italy and Spain respectively? 
(a) 5:7 
(b) 7:5 
(c) 1:1 
(d) 1:2 
(e) 2:1 
 
Q19. I belongs to which city and likes which color? 
(a) Valencia, Cyan 
(b) Granada, white 
(c) Granada, Teal 
(d) Valencia, Grey 
(e) Genoa, Blue 
 
Q20. The one who likes cyan belongs to which city and lives with which person? 
(a) Valencia, C 
(b) Genoa, J 
(c) Granada, F 
(d) Genoa, L 
(e) Valencia, B 
 
Q21. Which person likes yellow and he is from which country? 
(a) F, Italy 
(b) E, Spain 
(c) J, Spain 
(d) I, Italy 
(e) B, Italy 
6 

 
 
Q22. How many persons belong from that country from where the person who likes teal 
belongs? 
(a) Seven 
(b) Six 
(c) Eight 
(d) Five 
(e) Four 
 
Directions (23-25): The five-judge bench of supreme court, headed by justice Ashok Bhushan, held 
that the law providing for quota to the Maratha community beyond 50% violated equality and that 
the state failed to show any extraordinary reason why Marathas should be considered as socially 
and economically backward class. The bench also upheld the validity of the 102nd constitutional 
amendment and ruled that the Centre alone has the power to determine socially & educationally 
backward classes (SEBCs). It underlined that states can’t have a separate list of SEBCs and the power 
is only with the President to notify the list of SEBCs. In determination of SEBCs, the President shall 
be guided by the National Commission on Backward Classes. 
 
Q23. What course of action may be taken by Maharashtra government after supreme court held the 
law. 
(I) Maharashtra government will urge to centre to consider Maratha as socially and economically backward 
class. 
(II) Maharashtra government will support the central government by putting condition to consider this 
law. 
(III) Maharashtra CM will meet with President of India to make Maratha as socially and economically 
backward class. 
(a) Only II 
(b) Only I and III 
(c) Only III 
(d) All of three 
(e) Only II and III 
 
Q24. Which of the following are not in line with the given statement? 
(I) After the court judgement, Maratha community sit on dharna outside the CM house. 
(II) Centre has decided to review the request made by Maharashtra government for Maratha community. 
(III) Amid rise in covid cases, Maharashtra government has announced a 14 days lockdown in state. 
(a) Only I and II 
(b) Only III 
(c) Only I 
(d) Only II and III 
(e) None of them 
 
Q25. I. Mumbai Police arrested 15 people from all over the state and announced section 144 for 7 
days. 
II. Many violent activities taken place after dharna by Maratha community outside the CM and 
Governor house.  
Give answer 
(a) If Statement I is the cause and Statement II is its effect. 
(b) If Statement II is the cause and Statement, I is its effect. 
(c) If both the Statements I and II are independent causes. 
(d) If both the Statements I and II are effects of independent causes. 
(e) If both the Statement I and II are effects of some common causes. 
7 

 
 
Directions (26-28): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below- 
Six members live in a family of three generation and born in different years from 2002 to 2022. Ages of the 
persons is calculated on the base year 2023. 
Age of Q’s spouse is a prime number. S is the son of O’s son. Difference between the ages of oldest and 
youngest is 15 years which is equal to the sum of the ages of Q and S. N is the sister-in-law of the one who 
is 4 years younger to the oldest. The numbers of persons were born after R is same as before Q. M is married 
and the R’s nephew. Difference between the ages of O’s sibling and O’s son is same as the age of Q’s son. 
Ages of N and O is a multiple of 7. The number of male and female is equal. Sum of the ages of M and S is 
same as R’s age. N is older to O. 
 
Q26.What is the age of the oldest person in the family? 
(a) 21 years 
(b) 18 years 
(c) 20 years 
(d) 19 years 
(e) 17 years 
 
Q27.Who is Q's spouse? 
(a) O 
(b) N 
(c) M 
(d) R 
(e) None of these  
 
Q28.Which of the following is not true? 
(a) O’s grandson was born in odd numbered year 
(b) Sum of the ages of O and Q is 2 less than the oldest one 
(c) R is older to O’s daughter-in-law 
(d) M and Q are younger to O 
(e) N is the mother of the one who is 11 years old  
 
Directions (29-30): In a high-level meeting the Prime Minister took serious note of some reports 
about ventilators lying unutilised in storage in some states and directed that an immediate audit of 
installation and operation of ventilators provided by the central government be carried out. He 
added that refresher training for properly operating ventilators should be provided to healthcare 
workers, if necessary, the PMO said. He also asserted that localised containment strategies are the 
need of the hour, especially in states with high positivity rate in districts. 
 
Q29. Which of the following can be hypothesized from the given statement? 
I. It’s an effect of social media and electronic media, PM has given order of audit. 
II. Some ventilators will be found unutilized and not in operation in some states.  
III. Small containment zones in the districts will help to control the positivity rates.  
(a) Only I and II 
(b) Only I 
(c) Only I and III 
(d) Only II and III 
(e) All of three 
8 

 
 
Q30. What course of action should be taken by central government if ventilators are found 
unutilized and not in operation? 
I. All the officers and authorities should be sentenced to life imprisonment who all are found guilty. 
II. Proper investigation should be done and if there is lack of operational knowledge, a guided training 
should be given. 
III. All the ventilators which had given to states but are utilized should be taken back. 
(a) Only II and III 
(b) Only II 
(c) Only III 
(d) Only I and III 
(e) None of them 
 
Directions (31-35): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below- 
Twenty persons work at different designations- Chairperson, President, CEO, ED, MD, COO, CFO, Vice 
president, GM, Director, Branch manager and Clerk. The designations are given in descending order such 
that chairperson is the senior most designation and clerk is the junior most designation. At least three but 
not more than four persons designated at same designation. Some designations are vacant. 
J is two designations senior to L who is neither designated as Vice president nor designated as clerk. The 
number of designations junior to L is one less than the number of designations senior to B. C and G 
designated at the same designations. No one is designated between G and B who is not junior to C. M is 
designated at same designation with B but not with L. The just senior and just junior designations of G is 
vacant. Even number of persons are designated with B. No one is designated as junior to Q who is 
designated at same designation with L. No one designated between L and J. Only one designation is between 
O and Q. J is not junior to K. As many persons designated with M is same as Q. A, E and I are designated at 
the same designation. Odd number of persons are designated with N. A is senior to B but not just senior. N 
is four designations junior to A. D and F are designated at same designation but neither as Vice president 
nor as CEO. No one is designated as just junior and just senior to A. R and T are designated at same 
designation. S is junior to T. H is senior to P. Q and K have different designation. Same number of persons 
designated with D and G. T is not designated as vice president.  
 
Q31. At which designation A is designated? 
(a) COO 
(b) MD 
(c) CEO 
(d) President 
(e) Chairman 
 
Q32. Which among the following group of persons designated at the same designation? 
(a) T, D, O, K 
(b) A, H, D, F 
(c) S, D, G 
(d) S, L, Q 
(e) H, E, I 
9 

 
 
Q33. Four of the following five are alike in a certain way and form a group. Who among the following 
person does not belong to the group? 
(a) C 
(b) N 
(c) B 
(d) P 
(e) G 
 
Q34. How many persons are designated as junior to F? 
(a) Eight 
(b) Six 
(c) Three 
(d) Either three or six 
(e) Can’t be determined 
 
Q35. Which among the following statement(s) is/are true? 
I. L is designated as branch manager 
II. Even number of persons are designated between M and T 
III. More than six designations are vacant 
(a) Both I and II 
(b) Both II and III 
(c) Only I  
(d) Both I and III 
(e) Only III 
 
Directions (36-40): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below- 
Eight persons sit in square shaped room in which two concentric circular tables inscribed. Before the card 
play, they sit at inner table facing the centre in which some of them like fruit while some of them like colour. 
W sits 2 places away from the one who likes Green. S sits 3rd to the left of the one who likes Yellow. T sits 
3rd to the right of the one who likes Apple. The one who likes banana sits immediate left of P. The one who 
likes Kiwi sits 3rd to the right of U. R and the one who likes Mango are immediate neighbour. Q sits opposite 
the one who likes Banana. Q and T are immediate neighbour. U sits just left of the one who likes Purple. Q 
doesn’t like Purple. P neither likes any fruit nor purple. W sits just right of the one who likes yellow. R does 
not sit 2nd to the right of V. T does not like white.  
 
After the card play, they interchanged their position (fruits and colours position remains same) 
according to the given condition below-  
1. If 1 comes in dice, then the person who rolls dice interchanges his position with the 4th right person. 
2. If 2 comes in dice, then the person who rolls dice interchanges his position with the 3rd left person. 
3. If 3 comes in dice, then the person who rolls dice shift his position just behind (outer circle) the one who 
sits 2nd to the right of him. 
4. If 4 comes in dice, then the person who rolls dice shift his position just behind (outer circle) the one who 
sits 3rd to the left of him. 
5. If 5 comes in dice, then the person who rolls dice interchanges his position with 2nd to the left person. 
6. If 6 comes in dice, then the person who rolls dice shift his position just behind him in square table. 
10 

 
After sitting, they roll dice and they get different numbers given below in the given serial order. 
(a) P gets 2 
(b) T gets 5 
(c) Q gets 3  
(d) S gets 4  
(e) W gets 5  
(f) S gets 6 
(g) U gets 4 
(h) V gets 1