======================================================================
Exam: IBPS RRB PO
Phase: Mains
Year: 2022
Shift: 1
Subject: Reasoning
Source: https://www.bankersadda.com/wp-content/uploads/multisite/2024/05/10163101/IBPS-RRB-PO-Mains-Previous-Year-Paper-2022.pdf
======================================================================

Q1. What is the difference between the money deposited by Y and K? 
(a) Rupees 480 
(b) Rupees 220 
(c) Rupees 120 
(d) Rupees 210 
(e) None of these 
 
Q2. On which of the following day, the third highest amount of money is deposited? 
(a) Tuesday 
(b) Thursday 
(c) Monday 
(d) Wednesday 
(e) None of these 
 
Q3. Which of the following persons deposited money just before H? 
(a) T 
(b) G 
(c) The one who deposits four days before L 
(d) None of these 
(e) The one who deposited money on Thursday 
 
Q4. Four of the following five are similar in a certain manner and related to a group, which among 
the following does not belong to the group? 
(a) K-H 
(b) Y-G 
(c) L-D 
(d) T-Y 
(e) K-Y 
2 

 
 
Directions (5-8): In each question, some statements are showing relationship between different 
elements and are followed by two conclusions. Assuming the given statements are true, now find 
out which of the two conclusion(s) is/are definitely true.  
 
Q5.  
 
(a) Only I is true 
(b) Only II is true 
(c) Either I or II is true 
(d) Neither I nor II is true 
(e) Both I and II are true 
 
Q6.  
 
(a) Only I is true 
(b) Only II is true 
(c) Either I or II is true 
(d) Neither I nor II is true 
(e) Both I and II are true 
 
Q7.  
 
(a) Only I is true 
(b) Only II is true 
(c) Either I or II is true 
(d) Neither I nor II is true 
(e) Both I and II are true 
 
Q8.  
 
3 

 
(a) Only I is true 
(b) Only II is true 
(c) Either I or II is true 
(d) Neither I nor II is true 
(e) Both I and II are true 
 
Directions (9-12): A word and number arrangement machine when given an input line of numbers 
and words rearranges them following a particular rule in each step. The following is an example of 
rearrangement.  
Input:47 audio dictum 99 crore 65 glossy myth 12 83  
Step I: 99 47 audio crore 65 glossy myth 12 83 dictum 
Step II: glossy 99 47 audio crore 65 myth 12 dictum 83 
Step III: 65 glossy 99 47 audio myth 12 dictum 83 crore 
Step IV: audio 65 glossy 99 myth 12 dictum 83 crore 47 
Step V: 12 audio 65 glossy 99dictum 83 crore 47 myth 
Step V is the last and final step of the given input. With the same logic, find the steps and final output for 
the input given below. 
Input: 23 47 model 52 reader 66 travel egg 31 answer  
 
Q9. Which of the following element is 3rd to the left of 9th element from left end in penultimate step? 
(a) 23 
(b) Travel 
(c) Reader 
(d) 66 
(e) None of these 
 
Q10. How many elements are in between ‘model’ and ‘52’ in step II? 
(a) One 
(b) Two 
(c) Three 
(d) Four 
(e) None of these 
 
Q11. What is the highest consonant in the 2nd word from right end in last step? 
(a) W 
(b) M 
(c) V 
(d) R 
(e) None of these 
 
Q12. In which of the following step ‘travel 31 reader’ is found in the same manner? 
(a) Step IV 
(b) Step II 
(c) Step III 
(d) Step V 
(e) There is no such step 
4 

 
 
Q13. India is the world’s most populous democracy and will, by 2030, be the most populous country, 
overtaking China. And it is young — there are more Indian 10-year-olds than there are Australians. 
With more than a dozen distinct languages, scripts and religions, India is multiculturalism on the 
grandest scale. 
Which of the following is not in the line of given statement? 
(I) Australia will be the most popular study destination for Indian students. 
(II) India is the cradle of the human race, the birth place of human speech, the mother of history, the 
grandmother of legend, and the great grandmother of tradition. 
(III) In India there is a political equality which provides for the participation of all people without any 
discrimination as to gender, race, caste and colour. 
(a) Only II and III 
(b) Only III 
(c) Only I and III 
(d) Only I 
(e) All I, II and III 
 
Q14. The collapse of a great wall of garbage in east Delhi’s Ghazipur area, sweeping people and 
vehicles into a nearby canal, is a stark reminder that India’s neglected waste management crisis 
can have deadly consequences. More than a year after the notification of the much-delayed Solid 
Waste Management Rules, cities and towns are in no position to comply with its stipulations, 
beginning with the segregation of different kinds of waste at source and their scientific processing. 
What may be the fallout of laxity towards waste management? 
(I) Organic Waste should use to make affordable household biogas plants and production of methane for 
power generation. 
(II) Waste materials can worsen air pollution level due to which people will face issue in breathing. 
(III) Supreme court comes in action after PIL has been filed by group of peoples in Delhi. 
(a) Only I and III 
(b) Only II and III 
(c) Only II 
(d) Only III 
(e) None of them 
 
Q15. In an eight-floor building where floors are numbered as 1 to 8 from bottom to top respectively, 
C lives on 5th floor. Three persons live between C and A who lives six floors below E. N lives just 
below G but above V. R lives above U. Find how many persons live between U and A? 
(a) Five 
(b) Six 
(c) Three 
(d) Two 
(e) Four 
 
Directions (16-19): Read the given information carefully and answer the questions based on it: 
Riya and Mohan leave their homes and visit the temple where they meet each other. Riya left her home and 
walks 26m in west to reach point P. Here, she takes two consecutive right turns of 12m and 18m and 
reaching point Q and point R respectively. From point R, she turns 90 degrees anticlockwise and reached 
point S after walking 14m. Now, she turns right and reached point T after walking 50m. Here, she takes a 
right tuns and walks 26m to reach point U which is 22m east of temple. 
5 

 
Mohan left his home and walks 34m in north to reach point A. Here, he takes two consecutive left turns of 
21m and 17m and reached point B and point C respectively. From point C, he turns right and walks 32m to 
reach point D and from here, he walks 10m towards north to reach point E. Now, he turns right and walks 
20m to reach point F which is 17m south of temple.  
 
Q16. What is the difference between the distances covered by Riya and Mohan from their houses to 
temple? 
(a) 27m 
(b) 20m 
(c) 17m 
(d) 24m 
(e) None of these 
 
Q17. In which direction is point S with respect to point B? 
(a) South-east 
(b) West 
(c) North-west 
(d) South 
(e) None of these 
 
Q18. What is the distance and direction of Riya’s home with respect to temple? 
(a) 14m, south-west 
(b) 18m, west 
(c) 20m, north-west 
(d) 20m, west 
(e) None of these 
 
Q19. Four of the following five pairs are similar in a certain manner and forms a group, which of the 
following is dissimilar from the group? 
(a) P-T 
(b) D-temple 
(c) C-U 
(d) Q-Mohan’s home 
(e) F-B 
 
Q20. The Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) has said that the random testing for corona 
will be carried out in coming week on passengers coming from states where the cases are 
increasing. "After collection of samples, the travelers would be allowed to exit. However, those 
passengers who are found positive, shall be mandatorily quarantined as per the protocol of 
ministry of health and family welfare. 
Which of the following can be assumed from the above statement? 
(I) Corona cases may increase in upcoming week.  
(II) Delhi Government will announce for lockdown in the state. 
(III) Domestic and International flights will be temporarily shut down within a month. 
(a) Only II and III  
(b) Only III 
(c) Only I and III 
(d) Only II 
(e) Only I  
6 

 
 
Q21. Most of the competitive examinations are in objective nature have several advantages over 
the subjective ones. Evaluation of subjective type involves human elements and therefore 
sometimes subject to vagaries. Assessment of subjective needs good subjective knowledge while 
objective has the advantage of almost error free evaluation. Negative marking in objective 
evaluation is good for examination system. 
Which of the following diminish the advantage of objective assessment over subjective one? 
(I) The subjective types are bound to have human error. 
(II) Subjective evaluation takes more time in assessment as compare to objective one. 
(III) A fortunate person can get good marks in just guessing the answer instead of negative marking in 
objective test. 
(a) Only I and III 
(b) Only II 
(c) Only I 
(d) Only III 
(e) All of three 
 
Directions (22-25): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below: 
Eight persons- P, Q, R, S, T, U, V and W work in a company at different designations - General Manager (GM), 
Managing director (MD), Deputy General Manager (DGM), Assistant General Manager (AGM), Manager 
(MG), Assistant Manager (AM), Section Officer (SO), and Clerk (CL). The designations are given in 
descending order such that - GM is the senior-most designation and Clerk is the junior-most designation. 
Each of them likes different fruits- Mango, banana, Kiwi, Orange, grapes, Papaya, Pears and Apricot. All the 
information is not necessarily in the same order. 
The one who likes orange is three designations senior to U. Neither DGM nor AGM likes orange. Three 
persons are designated between T and U. The one who likes Kiwi is immediately senior to the one who 
likes Grapes. T is junior to the one who likes Kiwi. Not more than four persons are designated between U 
and the one who likes Kiwi. Odd number of designations are in between U and the one who likes grapes. V 
is three designations senior to the one who likes Grapes. The one who likes Apricot is junior to V and 
immediately senior to P. At least one person is designated between P and U. The one who likes Pears is two 
designations senior to the one who likes Banana. R is immediately senior to the one who likes Banana. S 
neither likes Orange nor likes Pears. The one who likes Mango is senior to the one who likes Papaya. Q is 
senior to W who is junior to the one who likes Mango.  
 
Q22. Who among the following likes Papaya? 
(a) The one who is clerk 
(b) S 
(c) P 
(d) The one who is Section Officer  
(e) Q 
 
Q23. How many persons are designated between V and the one who is immediately senior to the 
one who likes Banana? 
(a) Four 
(b) Two 
(c) Five 
(d) Three 
(e) Six 
7 

 
 
Q24. Which among the following statement(s) is/are true? 
(a) More than two designations gap is between V and the one who likes Kiwi 
(b) U is senior to Q 
(c) W likes Grapes 
(d) Q is just junior to W 
(e) All are true 
 
Q25. If S is related to the one who likes Grapes in the similar way P is related to the one who likes 
Orange, then who among the following is related to the one who likes Pears? 
(a) T 
(b) S 
(c) U 
(d) W 
(e) R 
 
Directions (26-28): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below: 
In a family of 10 members there are three generations. Y is daughter-in-law of K’s only sibling. U is brother-
in-law of K. J is parent of K. Z is brother-in-law of J and vice versa. K is niece of X who is not sibling of Z. Z is 
unmarried member of the family. V is sibling of U. K is not spouse of V. Gender of U and W is same but 
different from T. R is elder than T. Number of females are more than number of males. 
 
Q26. How V is related to T? 
(a) Brother-in-law 
(b) Brother 
(c) Sister-in-law 
(d) Nephew 
(e) Uncle 
 
Q27. Who among the following is the grandchild of J? 
(a) Y 
(b) The one who is spouse of T 
(c) The one who is niece of X 
(d) The one who is nephew of V 
(e) K 
 
Q28. What is the ratio of male to female members in the family? 
(a) 2:3 
(b) 3:2 
(c) 4:1 
(d) 1:4 
(e) 3:7 
8 

 
 
Q29. If in the given number “6493781539” the first five digits are arranged in ascending order from 
left to right then the last five digits are arranged in descending order from left to right then what 
will be the resultant value when the digit which is fifth from the left end is divided by the digit which 
is second from the right end in the number thus formed after the arrangement? 
(a) 2 
(b) 3 
(c) 7 
(d) 4 
(e) 1 
 
Directions (30-31): Most of the competitive examinations are in objective nature have several 
advantages over the subjective ones. Evaluation of subjective type involves human elements and 
therefore sometimes subject to vagaries. Assessment of subjective needs good subjective 
knowledge while objective has the advantage of almost error free evaluation. Negative marking in 
objective evaluation is good for examination system. 
 
Q30. What can be inferred from the word “vagaries” used in given statement? 
(a) Evaluation being error-ridden 
(b) That which cannot be controlled and can influence a situation 
(c) Mistakes in evaluating a specific paper 
(d) Both (a) and (b) 
(e) Both (b) and (c) 
 
Q31. Which among the following inference can best attributed on the basis of given statement? 
(I) Purpose of Examinations 
(II) Advantages of objective evaluation 
(III) Positives of the negatives 
(IV) Subjective over objective 
(a) Only I and IV 
(b) Only III 
(c) Only II and III 
(d) Only IV 
(e) Only II and IV 
 
Directions (32-35): In each of the questions given below four statements are followed by some 
conclusions. You have to take the given statements to be true even if they seem to be at variance 
from commonly known facts. Read all the conclusions and then decide which of the given 
conclusions logically follow(s) from the given statements disregarding commonly known facts. 
 
Q32. Statements:  
Only a few food is fresh 
Some frame is not flop 
All fresh is frame 
Some flip is flop 
9 

 
Conclusions:  
I. All food can never be flop 
II. Some fresh being flip is a possibility 
III. All frame can be food 
(a) Both I and II  
(b) Both II and III  
(c) Only III  
(d) Both I and III 
(e) None follows 
 
Q33. Statements:  
Only winter is summer 
Only a few spring is winter 
No rainy is spring 
Some rainy is autumn 
Conclusions:  
I. Some summer is not autumn 
II. All autumn can never be spring 
III. All winter being rainy is a possibility 
(a) Both I and II  
(b) Both II and III  
(c) Only III  
(d) Both I and III 
(e) None follows 
 
Q34. Statements:  
All dream are mare 
Some mare is risk 
Only a few risk is target 
All risk is rank 
Conclusions:  
I. All rank being target is a possibility 
II. Some dream is not risk 
III. All rank can be mare 
(a) Both I and II  
(b) Both II and III  
(c) Only III  
(d) Both I and III 
(e) All follow 
 
Q35. Statements:  
No red is yellow 
All red is white 
Only a few black is white 
Some black is blue 
10 

 
Conclusions:  
I. All blue being red is a possibility 
II. Some white is not black 
III. Some yellow being blue is not a possibility 
(a) Both I and II  
(b) Both II and III  
(c) Only III  
(d) Both I and III 
(e) Only I 
 
Q36. In each of the questions given below four statements are followed by some conclusions. You 
have to take the given statements to be true even if they seem to be at variance from commonly 
known facts. Read all the conclusions and then decide which of the given conclusions logically 
doesn’t follow from the given statements disregarding commonly known facts. 
Statements:  
Only a few sheet is bag 
All paper is bag 
No pen is paper 
Some sheet is not scale 
Conclusions:  
I. All sheet can never be scale 
II. All bag being pen is a possibility 
III. Some sheet is not bag 
(a) Only I 
(b) Both II and III  
(c) Only II  
(d) Both I and III 
(e) Only III 
 
Directions (37-40): Study the following information carefully and answer the questions given 
below: 
Ten persons sit in two parallel rows such that five persons sit in each row. In row 1- P, Q, R, S and T sit and 
all of them face south direction while in row 2- A, B, C, D and E sit and all of them face north direction. 
Persons sit in row 1 face the persons sit in row 2 and vice versa. Each of them likes different colours- Pink, 
Blue, Red, Green, Yellow, Grey, Black, White, Magenta, and Cyan. All the information is not necessarily in 
the same order.  
The one who likes pink faces the one who sits second to the left of C. T sits immediate right of the one who 
likes pink. Two persons sit between T and the one who likes blue. B sits second to the left of A and doesn’t 
face T. The one who likes magenta is the only immediate neighbor of B. D sits second to the left of the one 
who faces S. Three persons sit between the one who likes grey and yellow. The one who likes green faces 
the one who likes yellow. The one who likes cyan sits adjacent to R. Q sits adjacent to T and to the left of P. 
The one who likes black sits adjacent to the one who likes red. The one who likes white faces the one who 
is an immediate neighbor of the one who likes red.  
11 

 
 
Q37. Who among the following likes Magenta colour? 
(a) B 
(b) D 
(c) P 
(d) Q 
(e) S 
 
Q38. Which among the following statement(s) is/are true? 
(a) R sits to the left of the one who likes Pink colour 
(b) More than two persons sit between R and P 
(c) Q sits exactly at the middle of row 1 
(d) T faces D 
(e) All are true 
 
Q39. Four of the following five belong to a group in a certain way, who among the following does 
not belong to that group? 
(a) The one who likes red colour 
(b) The one who likes blue colour 
(c) B 
(d) P 
(e) The one who likes grey colour 
 
Q40. If all the persons sit in alphabetical order (position of colours remains same) from left to right 
in row 1 then who among the following person likes white colour?  
(a) P 
(b) Q 
(c) S 
(d) R 
(e) T 
 
Directions (41-45): The table given below shows total number of HR, the ratio of HR to Finance 
employees and the difference between HR and Finance employees in four (P, Q, R & T) different 
companies. Read the data carefully and answer the questions.